A histogram is a bar chart which shows
the frequency of a given phenomena.
A great example
are probability distributions.
For instance, in the first
course in this specialization,
we touched on the difference between
the random, uniform, normal, and
chi squared distributions.
Probability function can be visualized
as a curve, where the y-axis holds
the probability a given value would occur,
and the x-axis is the value itself.
This is called a probability
density function.
The y-axis values are limited to between
zero and one, where zero means there's no
chance of a given value occurring and one
means that the value will always occur.
The x-axis values are labeled in
terms of the distribution function.
In the case of the normal distribution,
this is usually in terms
of standard deviations.
So a histogram is just a bar chart where
the x-axis is a given observation and
the y-axis is the frequency with
which that observation occurs.
So we should be able to plot
a given probability distribution
by sampling from it.
Now, recall that sampling means
that we just pick a number out of
the distribution, like rolling a die or
pulling a single card out of a deck.
As we do this over and over again,
we get a more accurate
description of the distribution.
Let's pull some samples from
the normal distribution and
plot four different
histograms as subplots.
First I'll create our 2 x
2 grade of axis objects.
In this case, we don't want to
share the y-axis between the plots
since we're intentionally looking at
a number of different sizes of samples.
We're mostly interested in how
uniform the distribution looks.
Then we can iterate through a list
of four different values, 10, 100,
1,000 and 10,000.
And we'll pull samples from the NumPy.
Remember that the normal function of
random just creates a list of numbers
based on the underlying
normal distribution.
We can then plot these to a given
axis object using the hist function.
And set the title as appropriate.
Well, there we go.
The first plot only has ten samples,
so it looks pretty jagged.
And in my version here I don't think
anyone would say this is obviously
a normal distribution.
When we jump to 100 samples,
it gets better, but still quite jagged.
Then it seems to smooth out a bit on
the plots for 1,000 and 10,000 samples.
But if we look closely, we can see
that the bar of the 10,000 plots
are actually wider than those of the 10 or
the 100 plot.
What's going on here?
By default, the histogram in Matplotlib
uses ten bins, that is ten different bars.
Here we created a shared x-axis, and
as we sample more from the distribution,
we're more likely to get outlier
values further from our mean.
Thus, ten bins for n=10 is at
best capturing ten unique values,
while for n=10,000, many values have
to be combined into a single bin.
Let's do the same function
with the bin set to 100
Now we see that the 10,000 sampled
plot looks much smoother than all of
the others.
And the 10 sample plot shows that each
sample is basically in its own bin.
So I think this brings up an important
question of how many bins you should
plot when using a histogram.
I'm afraid that the answer
isn't really clear.
Both of these plots are true,
one is a visual of the data
at a coarse granularity, and
one at a more fine grain granularity.
When we look at the finest granularity
in our data, plotting with 10,000 bins
then the histograms became basically
useless for decision making.
Since they aren't showing trends between
samples as much as they're just showing
the sample size themselves.
This is similar to using
aggregate statistics
like the mean in standard deviation
to describe a sample of a population.
These values are coarse and
whether they are appropriate depends
highly on your questions and interests.
I've linked here to an optional
reading which considers the issue
of how many bins are appropriate from
a couple of different statistical stances.
But keep in mind this understanding
that there's just no right or wrong,
just useful and useless for a given need.
I want to use our newfound
knowledge of histograms and
subplots to introduce you to a more
flexible GridSpec layout for subplots.
The GridSpec allows you to map axes
over multiple cells in a grid.
For instance, let's create a scatter
plot where the y values come from
the normal distribution, and the x
values come from a random distribution.
It's not totally clear from looking at
this plot what the actual distributions
are for each axis, but
we could add two smaller plots,
each histograms,
to make this a bit more clear.
I'm going to define a 3x3 grid,
nine cells in total.
I want the first histogram to take up the
top right space, and the second histogram
to take up the far left bottom two spaces,
rotated on its side.
The original scatter plot can take up
a two by two square in the bottom right.
To use the GridSpec,
we first import it, then create a new
GridSpec, the overall shape that we want.
When we add new items with the subplot,
instead of specifying the three
numbers of row, column and
position, we pass in the elements of the
GridSpec object which we wish to cover.
And very important here.
Because we are using the elements of a
list, all of the indexing starts at zero,
and is very reasonable to use slicing for
the beginning or ends of lists.
The GridSpec is indexed as rows and
columns using the indexing operator, or
square brackets.
So we'll create the first subplot and
histogram in row 0,
covering off the first element, the middle
position, and going to the end of the row.
We'll create the side_histogram
starting in row 1, and
continuing to the end of row elements,
but limited to the 0 column.
Finally we'll create the scatter
plot in the lower_right.
When we execute this,
we see our basic set of plots, great.
Now, let's fill this with some data.
First the scatter plot, then the top
histogram, which is for the x values,
then the side histogram for the y values.
And we want the side
histogram to be lined up, so
let's rotate the layout by
setting the orientation.
There are actually a few ways of
doing this, but since it's so common,
Matplotlib has an orientation parameter
which we can set to horizontal.
Okay, this is close.
We don't really care about the value
of the y-axes for the top histogram or
the value of the x-axes for
the bottom histogram.
Since these are probability
density histograms,
we care only about the relative values.
One handy function of an axes
object is that you can clear it.
So we don't have to
create a new figure and
do all the GridSpec work all over again.
So let's just call the clear
function on the two histograms.
Then we can call the hist function
with the normed=True argument.
Which tells Matplotlib to scale
the frequency data in the histogram
between 0 and 1.
Also we can flip the axes of
the left-hand side histogram
using the invert_xaxis function.
This gives us a rough solution.
We can see that the axes
values are not aligned.
Unfortunately, Matplotlib requires that
you share axes when creating plots, and
we can't do that post hoc sharing.
We can however, set the range of the axis
to clear things up a little bit more.
And we do this using the axes set_xlim and
set_ylim values.
I'll just hard code some of
these in here to demonstrate.
And there we go.
We can see that our top histogram
is random, pretty uniform, and
that the histogram for the y values indeed
looks like the normal distribution.
In fact, this image looks sort of crudely
like the image we looked at in the first
module of this course, from the MIT and
Harvard study on MOOC engagement.
And it should be pretty clear to
you now how we might adjust various
aspects of this plot so
that if we wanted to look even more
like that engagement image, we could.
In the next lecture,
we're going to take a look at
another kind of plot, the box plot.